# Overview
This page will guide you through the process of submitting your analysis data 
and meeting the standard required by FAANG.  If you have any questions about 
this process please contact [FAANG Data Coordination Centre](mailto:faang-dcc@ebi.ac.uk) for help. 

**Please contact [faang-dcc@ebi.ac.uk](mailto:faang-dcc@ebi.ac.uk) to discuss submission of analysis data files. 
We are currently preparing the instructions for the different types of analysis 
submission for FAANG.**

# Prerequisites:
You should have already submitted your FAANG sample data and raw data files 
that this analysis is based on to the public archives.

1. Please familiarise yourself with the latest [FAANG analysis ruleset](
https://data.faang.org/ruleset/analyses#faang) and the [FAANG data sharing principles](http://www.faang.org/data-share-principle).
2. You must have already [submitted your sample information](biosamples_template.md) and obtained your 
BioSamples accessions ahead of submitting analysis data.  You must then use 
these FAANG BioSamples accessions in your analysis submissions to ENA. 
The BioSamples accessions start with SAMEA followed by a unique number.
3. Read the [FAANG analysis metadata guidelines](https://data.faang.org/ruleset/analyses#faang) 
and gather the required information to meet the standards. The template below 
can be useful for gathering this information prior to starting the submission 
process. 
4. The relevant sequencing data should have already been submitted to ENA, 
take the notes of study accession, experiment accessions and run accessions 
which will be required in the template
5. Please refers to [ENA document: how to submit analysis](https://ena-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/submit/analyses.html). 
If the document could not solve the query or you need further 
help/clarification, please contact [FAANG DCC](mailto:faang-dcc@ebi.ac.uk)

Steps required to submit sequencing data:

1. [Download the Excel template](#1-download-the-excel-template) 
2. [Complete the template](#2-complete-the-template)

## 1. Download the Excel template
* Download the latest version of the [Excel template](
https://data.faang.org/assets/faang_analysis.xlsx)
* You can also download an [example template](
https://data.faang.org/assets/faang_analysis.xlsx) to refer to for advice on 
completion

Please refer to [ENA guidance](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/submit) on the 
requirements for submission and to the [latest analysis ruleset specification](https://data.faang.org/ruleset/analyses#faang). 
The rules for each attribute define if it is mandatory or optional and what 
sort of data is expected (numeric, date, text, etc.).

## 2. Complete the template
###### General submission guidance
The template is generated according to the [FAANG analysis ruleset](https://data.faang.org/ruleset/analyses#faang). In the 
ruleset, there are three rule groups: FAANG, ENA and EVA. The first two rule 
groups are mandatory and apply to all analysis records. The EVA rule group 
only applies when the analysis type is sequence_variation and the submitted 
file is a vcf file. Correspondingly there are three separate sheets in the 
template file. The complete analysis record is generated by combining rows 
in three sheets with the same analysis alias. Therefore it is extremely 
important to make sure that alias matches

###### 'faang' tab
The faang tab contains the necessary information unique to FAANG ruleset which 
is not required by ENA

**Alias:** provide a unique alias for the analysis record. The same alias must 
be used in the other sheets to identify the same record

**Project:** Always use "FAANG" as the project

**Secondary Project:** makes it possible to load the data into the 
corresponding project page, e.g. AQUA-FAANG. If the acronym is not in the 
list, please contact FAANG DCC to add the required acronym.

**Assay Type:** Should use the same value as the one used in the related 
experiment(s)

**Analysis Protocol:** The link to the protocol used to carry out the analysis 
process. The protocol is required to be publicly available and follow the 
naming convention INSTITUTE_SOP_PROTOCOLNAME_YYYYMMDD.pdf, e.g. 
ROSLIN_SOP_Alignment-based RNA-Seq-Processing_20170917.pdf. Please check 
the [organisation/group abbreviation page](organization_group_abbreviations.md) 
to find or add your organisation/group abbreviation for consistency across 
institutes. It is highly recommended to contact [FAANG DCC](mailto:faang-dcc@ebi.ac.uk) 
to host your protocol.

**Analysis Code:** The link to the public code repository which hosts the 
codes used in the analysis. The instruction of how to install and execute the 
codes should be clearly presented at the code repository to let others easily 
reproduce the analysis.

**Reference Genome:** The reference genome used in the analysis, please use 
one of the listed values in the [analysis ruleset specification](https://data.faang.org/ruleset/analyses#faang). 
Use 'not applicable' if a reference genome was not required for this analysis type. 
Contact [FAANG DCC](mailto:faang-dcc@ebi.ac.uk) to add new reference assembly.

###### 'ena' tab
The analysis data is submitted to ENA as analysis objects, therefore it must 
meet the [ENA analysis requirement](https://github.com/enasequence/schema/blob/master/src/main/resources/uk/ac/ebi/ena/sra/schema/SRA.analysis.xsd).  This tab contains but not limits to all 
mandatory fields required by ENA.

**Alias:** provide a unique alias for the analysis record. The same alias must 
be used in the other sheets to identify the same record

**Title:** the title of the analysis record

**Analysis type:** indicates the type of the analysis. Depending on the chosen 
value, additional type-specific rule groups may apply

**Description:** it is a free text field. It is highly recommended to include 
as much information as possible in the description

###### Reference genomes
The metadata rules ([FAANG analysis ruleset](https://data.faang.org/ruleset/analyses#faang)) require you to reference a genome 
used in your analysis, if applicable. Please contact [faang-dcc@ebi.ac.uk](mailto:faang-dcc@ebi.ac.uk) if 
the reference genome you have used is not listed.